Ms/feature cicd doc (#19)
axioned/handbook: docs/processes/delivery/Continous/github-action/github-action-for-wordpress.md

---
id: GithubActions
title: GitHub Actions for Wordpress
sidebar_label: Wordpress GitHub Actions
tags: [GitHub, Actions, CICD, Deployment, Wordpress, yml, WP Engine, AWS]
---

This document is an overview of the required information that a developer needs to have
in order to implement CI/CD in any of the Wordpress projects.

CI/CD automates your builds, and deployment so you can ship code changes faster and more reliably.

# General Information

### Platform
The platform supported by the below scripts can run on GitHub since the below scripts are using GitHub action to achieve CI/CD.

### Prerequisite
- A GitHub account
- Repository/Project on GitHub (public/private)

> - Necessary Permissions on the repository to store some SECRET KEYS in - Github (for more details connect with the IT team/Sagar)

Reviewer: Not sure I understand this well enough. I don't see any harm in specifying what secrets.

- Access to the hosting/control panel to extract the server details and the Private keys etc.
- SSH should be enabled/supported by the hosting provider

### Architecture 
*File & Folder Structure*
    
    ├── .github
    │   └── workflows
    │       ├── prod.yml
    │       └── stage.yml
    │       └── dev.yml
    ├── wp-content
    │   ├── themes
    │   └── plugins
    ├── .gitignore
    └── README.md

# Why CI/CD?
The short answer would be - Speed.
While faster development is the most well-known benefit of CI/CD, continuous integration and continuous delivery pipeline enable much more.

- Development velocity
- Stability and reliability
- Business growth

[Learn more about the benefits of CI/CD](https://resources.github.com/webcasts/Devops-collaboration-GitHub-Actions-thankyou/)

# How to build a CI/CD pipeline
Build a CI/CD pipeline with GitHub Actions
[Learn more](https://github.blog/2022-02-02-build-ci-cd-pipeline-github-actions-four-steps/)

Key advantages of using GitHub Actions for CI/CD pipelines
- CI/CD pipeline set-up is simple
- Respond to any webhook on GitHub
- Community-powered, reusable workflows
- Support for any platform, any language, and any cloud

> [Learn more about](https://youtu.be/5MJRtldPOEI)  how to start a CI pipeline with Actions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Learn more about](https://youtu.be/5MJRtldPOEI)  how to start a CI pipeline with GitHub Actions
```

You should see a list of CI/CD and workflow automation templates that match the technology your project uses

#### A CI/CD workflows include:
- <u>**A development workflow**</u>
    This workflow runs through a few different jobs whenever a pull request is opened, edited, synchronized, or reopened. These jobs include setting up Node, installing npm packages and dependencies, running npm test, and cycling through a number of lint jobs too (setup node, install npm@latest, install dependencies, lint code… you get the idea).

</br>

- <u>**A CodeQL Analysis workflow**</u>
    This workflow runs a series of CodeQL security tests on our code after we merge it to the main branch to ensure there are no known vulnerabilities.
    
    Check out the [YAML](https://github.com/aaronwinston/open-sauced/blob/main/.github/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml) file for yourself. It’s super simple
    
</br>

- <u>**A release and builds workflow**</u>
    This workflow runs tests and enforces lint after releasing code changes to Docker and building the application. It also deploys the final code to our production environment
    

>     you can see which jobs and steps happen in the [workflow](https://github.com/aaronwinston/open-sauced/blob/main/.github/workflows/release.yml) for yourself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You can see which jobs and steps happen in the [workflow](https://github.com/aaronwinston/open-sauced/blob/main/.github/workflows/release.yml) for yourself.
```

_**Tip**: Few Github actions resources, basics to CI/CD - [reference link](https://github.blog/2021-11-04-10-github-actions-resources-basics-ci-cd/)_

</br>

# CI/CD Example and detailed process step by step
#### <u>Step 1</u>: Set up your Project/Repository on Github on which you want to set up the CI/CD process

<br>

#### <u>Step 2</u>: Setup GitHub workflow

Here we have 2 ways to set up the GitHub workflow _(recommended is 2nd one for good practice)_

##### 1. GitHub UI (via GitHub website)
In this approach follow the below steps to achieve

- Go to the respective repository on the GitHub site
- Navigate to the **Action** menu on the top
- Then click on **set up a workflow yourself** or you can click from the suggested list below
- After clicking you will be redirected to the YML file here you will add the code for deployment _(an example is attached below for reference)_

##### 2. Via custom YML code _(within project setup phase)_:
_You can manually create a respective YML file and put it into the GitHub workflows folder_

In this case, follow the below steps to set up

> 1. Make sure you are on the master/main branch of the project _(the file should exist in your master and development branch and it should not be in gitignore)_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Make sure you are on the main (default) branch of the repository.
```

2. Create a folder `.github` inside create `workflows` folder in the root directory of the project _(in our case it will reside outside the wp-content folder)_

> 3. Under the workflows folder, you can create your deployment file which is a YML file in the end the path for the file will look like this: `.github/workflows/dev.yml`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Under the workflows folder, you can create your deployment `.yml` file. The folder structure will look like this: `.github/workflows/dev.yml`
```

4. You can set up all the processes and actions to be taken once the GitHub action is triggered.
5. Once you are done with the YML file commit the changes and push the file

> 6. As per the code, the actions will be taken

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. As per instructions in `.yml` file, the actions will run on GitHub.
```

> 7. Later step you will get to know the details of what goes into the YML file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. In the later step we will see what goes into the `.yml` file.
```

<br>

#### <u>Step 3</u>: Understanding the YML script below
Below attached is the snippet for the basic flow which is set for CI/CD in our case

> <u>**Note:**</u> the code is case sensitive and the indentation is very important wrong indentation will result in **Build Failure**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<u>**Note:**</u> the code is case sensitive and the indentation is very important wrong indentation will result in **Build Failure**
```

```yml 
# This is a basic workflow to help you get started with Actions
name: Auto Deployment on Dev Environment
 
# Controls when the workflow will run
on:
 # Triggers the workflow on push or pull request events but only for the staging branch
 push:
   branches: [ staging ]
  
jobs:
 deploy:
   runs-on: ubuntu-latest
 
   steps:       
   # Deploy Files on the server using rsync command, after that delete the cache folder from server
   - uses: actions/checkout@v2
   - name: Rsync to WP Engine Dev Env
     env:

>        dest: 'dev123v@dev123v.ssh.wpengine.net'

Reviewer 2: Can you mark the variables in the `.yml` that need to the swapped?

>        dest: 'dev123v@dev123v.ssh.wpengine.net'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       dest: '[WP_USER_NAME]@[WP_USER_NAME].ssh.wpengine.net'
```

     run: |
       echo "${{secrets.DEV_DEPLOY_KEY_PRIVATE}}" > deploy_key
       chmod 600 ./deploy_key
       rsync -chav -e 'ssh -i ./deploy_key -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no' \
         --exclude /deploy_key \
         --exclude /.git/ \
         --exclude /.gitignore/ \
         --exclude /.github/ \
         --exclude /.github/workflows \
         --exclude /node_modules/ \
         ./ ${{env.dest}}:/sites/dev123v
       ssh -i ./deploy_key -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no ${{env.dest}} 'rm -r /sites/dev123v/wp-content/cache -f'
```
</br>

For more information about the GitHub action please visit this [link](https://github.blog/2021-11-04-10-github-actions-resources-basics-ci-cd/)

> Documentation for GitHub action: [link](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Documentation for GitHub Action: [link](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)
```

Here is the high-level summary/understanding of the above code (github _[link](https://github.com/axioned/axioned-wordpress-starter/blob/main/.github/workflows/dev.yml))_:

> - **on**: Since we are using GitHub actions to deploy the files from the GitHub server/repository to the development server _(where the site is hosted)_

Reviewer 2: Can we paste the line for code instead of mentioning the key name 'on'?
This can improves the readability of the doc and easier to follow while reading.
e.g. 
```
on:
 push:
```

    - Syntax -> **username@remote_host(IP/Domain_name)**
    - while adding destination make sure you add the correct path for the deployment _(where needs to be copied/deployed the entire repo as mentioned in the script)_
    - In our example, the site was installed at `/sites/dev123v/` the entire wp setup and their files

- **run**: then we will proceed with the actual command that needs to be executed by action runner on the latest ubuntu as we declared in the above code

- Here we are executing multiple commands in series in order to deploy files from the GitHub repository to the development server
    - **echo**: using this line we are saving/creating a private key file which will be required to establish a connection between the GitHub ubuntu machine and the development server further
        - In our example, **DEV_DEPLOY_KEY_PRIVATE** this variable was used in the script
        - This needs to be created on GitHub under **Settings -> Secrets -> Action** _(If not visible please contact the IT team/Sagar for access)_
        - The private key you can download it from the server using your hosting login
    - **chmod**: setting up the proper permissions to the file

>     - **rsync**: using this command we are transferring the files from the GitHub repository to the actual development server over an ssh connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **[rsync](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/rsync)**: using this command we are transferring the files from the GitHub repository to the actual development server over an ssh connection
```

>         - For more information about **rsync command** and its usage you can check this [link](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/rsync)

Reviewer 2: Remove or shorten these resource links. We can add a link for rsync above.
